[grand music]
[triumphant music]
[ominous music]
[footsteps tapping]
I am Obersturmführer
Rolf Kessel from the SS.
And this is one of my men.
We found him in a ditch
with a kitchen knife
in his back.
Murdered by one of you.
You see
the German army retreating,
and it makes you feel hope.
It should not.
So who is responsible for this?
You, priest.
-What's your name?
-I'm Father Merrin.
Father Merrin.
These people confess to you?
-Yes.
-So point out the one
who is responsible.
No one here did this,
lieutenant.
They aren't capable of it.
[Kessel] Father, you must
help me with this.
-Oh, but how?
-Well, I need someone.
Do you understand?
Surely there is one
among them who beats his wife
or his children.
A thief, perhaps.
Every town has
someone it can do without.
Point him out.
There is no murderer here.
I have good news for you.
You are all innocent.
Your priest has told me so.
The murderer is no doubt
lurking in the countryside
waiting to strike at the next
group of German soldiers.
I am going to shoot 10 of you
in the hope that we can
demonstrate to this wretch
the responsibility
he has incurred.
-A worker's hand.
-Farmer.
-Excellent.
-[man] No!
-We will start with you.
-Stop!
You have some objection, Father?
In God's name,
you cannot do this.
You choose.
[tense music]
-What?
-Well, they're your flock.
You live among them.
So you choose.
I will not.
You give me 10 of them,
or I will kill them all.
Men, women and children.
-Shoot me.
-You have five seconds.
-I can't.
-You can't what?
Pick who will be sacrificed?
History is full of priests
who did little else.
You begin to irritate me,
Father.
-[gunshot]
-[people exclaiming]
[horse whinnies]
[woman sobbing]
[exhales sharply]
That was for making me wait.
I still want 10 more names.
What are you doing, Father?
Are you praying?
To God?
It's all right, Father.
I'll let you pray.
Because I know something.
You see...
[people exclaiming]
God isn't here today.
[music continues]
You win.
-Shoot them all.
-No! Wait!
-Joost Harmensz, take him.
-[people exclaiming]
-Too late, Father.
You had your chance.
-No, please.
Take Joost. And Jon.
-[people murmuring]
-[woman sobbing]
[tense music]
[gunshots]
[people sobbing]
That's good.
And who shall be next?
-[wind whistling]
-[ominous whirring]
[tense music]
[gunshots firing]
[man] That's him.
[man 2] He's Dutch, you say?
[man] Half.
His mother was English.
[soldiers shouting]
[man 2] Perhaps he might be
a bit more inclined
to see reason then.
[man] I wouldn't be concerned
about reason, major.
He's a scholar.
We've studied his works
at the Maryknoll Center.
[man 2] Oh, yes.
You Maryknolls.
Cropping up everywhere
these days.
It's a wonder the Jesuits
don't get after you
for poaching their game.
We all serve in the same cause,
Major Granville.
-He's not one of yours?
-No.
A simple parish priest
from Holland.
When did he develop
this archeological bent?
Right after the war.
-There was an incident.
-Yes.
Yes, I heard.
And his standing
in the Church now?
Undecided.
The site is right west
of Lake Rudolf,
in the Turkana district.
It's Early Christian,
which makes for quite a mystery
given its location.
Anyway...
we won't know more about it
until we get inside the thing.
I'd only uncovered
a small portion
of the roof before I got
summoned here.
[Granville]
Did you feel summoned?
I am sorry.
It's a question of status,
you see.
My status?
[Granville] Officially,
you're still listed
as a displaced person.
I wonder...
why didn't you take steps to
clear the matter up?
[Merrin] I've been busy.
Beautiful, aren't they?
[Merrin] Yes, very.
-Are you a lepidopterist?
-A hobby.
[chuckles] From school days.
You have been busy.
Six archeological digs
since the war.
This is the longest.
If this is
an official matter then...
-what is he doing here?
-Father Francis?
Well, for one thing,
he's quite an admirer of yours.
I'm about to begin missionary
work in the Turkana district.
I thought maybe we could
help each other.
-You know a lot
about the people.
-I'd rather not. Thank you.
This is a little awkward.
Cardinal Jenkins
is somewhat concerned
about an exploration
of this significance
conducted by a priest
who is on sabbatical.
-Temporary sabbatical.
-Which comes up
for review shortly.
[Merrin] Perhaps I should
take this up
with the governor's office.
They'd only send you back to me.
Why don't you have a seat,
Merrin.
You sure you won't
have that drink?
The cardinal wants to be sure
that the site's
religious aspects
are given proper
consideration.
Part of Father Francis's job
-will be to see to that.
-Are you an archeologist?
You're not the sole person
with an interest here.
I've contacted your sponsors
at Oxford.
They have no objection.
If you agree as well,
I can renew your visa
immediately.
We all must make
our little deals
with the devil, Merrin.
[percussive music]
[man] Before there were
the mines, traders came
to Derati for the water.
They still do but...
it is a hard life.
-[cow bellowing]
-Ah...
Why in God's name
are they tormenting that animal?
It is a sacrifice.
The new wife of
the chief elder,
Sebituana, will soon give birth.
Sebituana does not yet
have an heir.
So the people make sacrifices
in the hope that the gods
will provide one.
[cow bellowing]
It is a necessary thing.
Cruelty is never necessary,
Chuma.
You think we are savages? Eh?
I--I--I think some of you
are good people
lost in confusion.
There's nothing confusing
about that ceremony, Father.
They're weakening the bull
so that someone can approach it.
And as for some
of the Turkana being savages,
you may want to be careful.
Sebituana back there
is Chuma's cousin.
[cow bellowing]
[tense music]
[indistinct chattering]
Welcome back.
-Did you bring the supplies?
-Um, yes. They're in the back
of the lorry.
Chuma, could you get
Rachel's medical supplies?
Here's a letter for you.
How was Nairobi?
Hello. Are you the doctor?
Habari Kani , Lankester.
It's good to have you back.
Oh, thank you.
Your room is prepared.
We'll need another--
another room, Emekwi.
This is Father Francis.
-You're a friend of Lankester's,
Father?
-Oh, hello. I hope so.
I've actually come to open
a missionary school.
-This is your hotel?
-The finest establishment
in Derati.
Emekwi here, he's a Christian.
Maybe he can help you.
In any way I can.
James, Joseph.
These are my sons, Father.
They shall be your first pupils,
if you will have them.
[Francis] That's excellent,
Emekwi. Thank you.
Well, then, how far are we
from the site?
[tense music]
[gentle music]
[indistinct chattering]
Merrin.
How old do you think it is?
Well, the architecture seems to
date to the fifth century.
The Byzantine Empire had
adopted Christianity by then
but they never got
this far south.
Wanna have a look?
[Francis] You're--you're sure
it's all right?
Well, so long as
you don't touch anything
and keep an open mind.
It must have been an enormous
effort to get these
materials up here.
Up here?
Yes. The stones come from
a quarry near the lake.
Which means a distance of...
[intriguing music]
...miles.
It's impossible.
The stones look almost new.
With the wind and
sun up here...
Well, they should be
badly weathered.
The church must have
been deliberately buried
right after it was built.
What, they came here and built
something only to bury it?
I don't know.
Chuma, hire some more men.
Have them work double shifts.
I want these walls cleared.
[speaking Turkana]
[dramatic music]
-[bells ringing]
-[indistinct chattering]
[goats bleating]
[singing in Turkana]
[Francis] I can't understand it.
Who'd reported it?
[Emekwi] Except for this.
-[man continues singing]
-[donkey braying]
I cannot thank you enough
for your generosity, Emekwi.
Oh, please, Father,
the building goes unused.
And besides,
it is nothing more than our
Lord and Savior would expect.
If you need anything,
anything at all, just ask.
I wish others of our faith
felt that way.
Oh, but, of course,
the town will get
the room back soon, since...
-Since we'll have to build
a proper school.
-Oh, please, Father.
Do not think me
a doubting Thomas.
But...
we may not need
that new school right away.
Hello, Papa.
[Emekwi] Hello, Joseph.
-Hello, Papa.
-[Emekwi] Hello, James.
Well...
it's a beginning.
[tense music]
[man whimpering,
shouting indistinctly]
[Merrin] Call for the doctor.
[man continues shouting]
It is the heat.
[mumbling indistinctly]
Pick him up. Let's take him
down. I'll get some water.
-[man continues shouting]
-[speaking Turkana]
[music continues]
[Merrin] Don't let him take it
all at once.
Our friend is back.
[ominous music]
[Chuma] Ah. Cheche.
Come for food and water again.
It must be even worse for him
in this heat.
I'll try to get him
into the tent.
Do not let the men see that--
Don't be afraid.
[music continues]
[speaking foreign language]
[speaking Turkana]
[tires rumbling]
-[Merrin] You got here quickly.
-[Rachel] Your man
made it sound urgent.
[Merrin] Well, is it?
[Rachel] Chuma, try to
make him comfortable
in the back of my truck.
He needs rest and rehydration.
[speaking Turkana]
Heat stroke.
-You're working them too hard.
-There's water in the tent
if you'd like.
I would. Thank you.
[Merrin] We had another visit
from that boy today.
-[Rachel] Cheche?
-Yes.
-Any luck?
-[scoffs]
Couldn't even get close.
I had to sedate him
two weeks ago.
Just to treat a beating
he took from a villager.
Why don't they help him?
They think he's cursed.
What he needs is
sustained treatment.
Yes?
Nothing.
[tense music]
[animal whining]
[whining continues]
-[growling]
-[dramatic music]
-[gunshot]
-[hyenas whining, growling]
Early this year.
Two of the cattle
have been killed already.
Thank you, Chuma.
I must keep you safe
for the lady doctor.
[gentle music playing]
[indistinct chattering]
[dog barking]
[thunder rumbling]
[tense music]
[indistinct muttering]
[thunder rumbling]
Cheche.
[music continues]
[thunder rumbling]
Cheche.
[Cheche whimpering,
mumbling indistinctly]
[Merrin speaking Turkana]
[music continues]
[knocking on door]
[Rachel]
The sores were very infected.
I've cleaned and dressed them.
There's no permanent damage.
The leg and arm
are a different matter.
Night, Mara.
[speaking Turkana]
There's nothing you can do?
Not for the arm.
The leg...
The leg could be theoretical--
Theoret--
-Theoret...
-"Theoretically."
Theoretically, the leg
could be re-broken
and set properly by a surgeon
from Nairobi.
They fly from...
Do you think he'd allow it?
[gentle music playing]
It was called Chelmno.
That was the Polish name.
The Germans called it Kulmhof.
I was in a processing center
for confiscated items.
It's amazing what you're
capable of when your
physical survival is at stake.
Things you think
you could never endure.
Well, nobody knew back then.
Everybody, we heard stories--
[electricity buzzing]
[sighs] I wish they could fix
that generator.
No one wanted to believe.
Of course not.
Who could believe such things
were happening?
No one wanted to believe.
It's so much easier
to believe evil is random
or an ogre,
not that it's a human condition,
something everyone
is capable of.
I believed God let us decide
between good and evil.
I chose good.
Evil happened.
[electricity buzzing]
Now you travel.
What are you looking for?
Nothing.
Sometimes I think the best view
of God is from hell.
This boy here...
[tense music]
You brought something
out of that young man.
God is in that boy that
doesn't speak.
Until he tried to speak to you.
He's an unfortunate.
One of God's afflicted.
I think what you're looking for,
Father Merrin,
is here.
[thunder rumbling]
[music continues]
[ominous music]
[ticking]
[dramatic music]
[baby crying]
[wind whooshing]
[woman singing indistinctly]
[child whimpering]
[roaring]
[screaming in distance]
[growling]
[tense music]
[shovels scraping]
[gentle music]
-[indistinct chattering]
-[donkey braying]
[grand music]
[tense music]
You have been very brave,
Cheche.
You're on the mend.
There.
Better, eh?
[speaking Turkana]
Be...
Better.
Yes. Better.
Merrin was right about you,
Cheche.
I thought you'd run away.
Cheche,
if App and I...
If we could make your
leg better...
[speaking Turkana]
Better.
Would you want that?
Well.
We'll have a great deal of news
for Appa , won't we?
Merrin, it's magnificent.
[Merrin]
Wait till you get inside.
[doors creaking]
[tense music]
[Francis] The war in heaven.
St. Michael.
It's so strange.
Churches were built
to honor God,
provide a house of worship,
but this...
This can't have been
a meeting place.
No.
This had to have
another purpose.
Merrin.
Look at the figures.
Yes.
Church architecture is supposed
to reach for the heavens.
-But this looks as if--
-As if it were holding
something down.
These rocks.
These rocks are like plugs.
What is that?
[tense music]
Like a sarcophagus.
-[rattling]
-[canteen clattering]
[tense music]
Shh.
[whispering] What?
[water dripping]
-You hear that?
-Yes.
[music continues]
Chuma.
Bring me some men
and the shear legs.
[man speaking Turkana]
[ominous music]
What is it?
What are you frightened of?
[tense music]
It's a temple of some kind.
What idol could inspire
a place like this?
I'd say it's dedicated to him.
Some pagan god of these parts.
Chuma?
The old people would sometimes
tell stories
of mountain demons
to scare us, but...
They built the church
on top of this.
That's why they buried it.
To hold this down.
They used St. Michael
to emphasize
that the old gods
had no power before the one.
But I never believed.
[music continues]
These are bloodstains.
-People were sacrificed here.
-Yeah.
It's almost like a scene out of
the Inquisition, isn't it?
[tense music]
[cattle lowing]
The hyenas must have
attacked the cattle.
But the cattle...
killed them.
Then ate them.
And now they die of it.
[flies buzzing]
[speaking Turkana]
He wants you to stop digging.
He thinks the church is evil.
[speaking Turkana]
[exclaims]
His side of the family,
either old ways or nothing.
No argument.
[flies buzzing]
[grunts]
[tense music]
[cow grunting]
[Merrin] Look here.
Look, look how it was done.
The workers who did this
were not just--not just workers.
They were artists.
The mosaics came
from across the world.
Here. The great battle
of the angels.
[grand music]
The turquoise from Egypt,
malachite from Namibia,
lapis from Afghanistan.
[Rachel] Extraordinary.
[Merrin] This is St. Michael.
It's his church.
It's dedicated to him.
-[Rachel] But the violence...
-It's the war of heaven.
God's angels fighting Satan
and his legion...
cast into the underworld.
[Rachel] It's the sort of find
that makes a career.
[Merrin chuckles] I thought that
at first, but now it seems...
There is he.
Lucifer, source of light.
He was called
the most perfect of angels.
It will make you, Lankester.
But what will it make you?
You're trying to see through me.
Are you a head doctor as well?
It doesn't take an expert
to see you're suffering.
You're in guilt.
[Merrin] We're all in guilt.
[Rachel] What I told you
the other night,
I never told anyone else.
I told you because of something
I saw in you.
[indistinct chattering]
Merrin.
I've got to inform
Cardinal Jenkins.
I hope you understand
that if word gets out
about what's in there
-the danger of violation
and looting--
-Which is why we have
to inform
Major Granville as well.
Ask him to send
a detachment of guards.
Oh.
Because the British
have proved so trustworthy.
I suppose you haven't seen
the British Museum.
Everything in it was looted
from sites like that.
Merrin, please.
You're not
the only one involved.
-[tense music]
-[camel lowing]
Get on, boys.
[Sergeant Major]
All right, come on! Come on!
Come on! Out, out, out!
Welcome, major.
Welcome to Derati.
Fall in on the left,
promptly on the right.
Fall in and stand easy!
[Granville] Good morning.
Good morning.
-Beloved wherever we go.
-Sir.
Sergeant major,
have the men stand to attention.
I have a feeling
those good women
report to the local aristocracy.
And I don't want to display
even a hint of disrespect
-now or at any other time.
Am I clear?
-Yes, sir.
Respect for the godforsaken
fuzzies at all times, sir.
Sergeant major, that is
precisely the sort of comment--
Squad!
Squad, attention!
-Men standing to attention, sir.
-Thank you.
[Rachel] Mix it with blood
or water. It's for pain.
[speaking Turkana]
Sebituana's wife
has gone into labor.
She's in a great deal of pain.
-This is Dr. Lamu.
-Oh, doctor.
-Joseph Lamu.
-Rachel Lesno.
-So good of you to come.
-Not a problem.
I told them to bring her here,
but...
So I've sent some morphine.
[soldier] What, do you think
they count them?
-[soldier 2] Hm?
-Do you think they count them
every night?
-Might do.
You got no more sense
than the fuzzies, corporal.
Here.
Respect the stripes, boy.
Oh, "respect the stripes" now,
is it?
I tell you, they got thousands
of the things.
Just a handful would make us
rich for the rest of our lives.
-Or get us hung.
-Yeah?
Well, they can't hang us for
having a look, now, can they?
[doors opening]
-[playing drums]
-[people singing in Turkana]
[woman groaning]
[Merrin]
His wounds are healing well.
[Rachel] I hope we do as well
with this.
[Lamu] He's young.
His bones are strong.
-[panting]
-[dinging, drumming continue]
[moaning]
[speaking Turkana]
[woman moaning]
-[drumming, singing continue]
-[tense music]
[soldier] Jesus Christ!
Hundreds of them.
Every kind of precious stone.
Just a handful is all I need.
[scoffs]
All we need, private.
We pool the take. Yeah?
Yeah.
[drumming, singing
continue faster]
[screams]
[speaking Turkana]
[wind whistling]
[ominous whirring]
[dog barking]
[tense music]
Cover them.
Sorry, sir?
[Granville]
They're British soldiers.
I won't have them
left like that.
Of course, sir.
Richardson. Avery.
Get some blankets
and cover those soldiers.
You will keep me informed
about Cheche?
Yes, of course.
Merrin.
-What's going on here?
-What do you mean?
What's going on here?
This whole valley.
Why don't you stay
a couple of days.
You hardly had any rest.
I'll show you the dig,
the church we found.
Who's in charge here?
Military. Major Granville.
-Not you?
-[chuckling] No.
No, not me.
[tense music]
You take care of yourself,
Lankester Merrin.
Yes.
Thank you.
[music continues]
Who, Merrin?
Why?
Well, these were on the ground.
They'd been pried out
of the mosaics.
Maybe they were trying
to stop a robbery.
-Got killed by the thieves.
-Of course.
-Bloody savages.
-No.
There's no reason to suspect
the Turkana, major.
-What?
-The style of the killings,
the positioning of the bodies.
He's right.
It's--it's Christian imagery,
not pagan.
John the Baptist,
head on a platter.
-Peter the Apostle crucified--
-Are you saying a Christian
is responsible?
You're both insane.
Merrin.
Chuma, get that man out of here.
Jomo saw what happened, major.
Did he?
And what was it
this Jomo saw precisely?
Jomo watches from the hills that
lie above this place, and...
-And?
-He says...
He says he saw
the two soldiers argue.
One killed the other
and then stabbed himself.
What the devil are you saying?
[speaking Turkana]
They were stealing jewels.
And then some sort of madness
overtook them--
Be quiet!
I won't hear another word!
[tense music]
That is the most...
Tell this man that if
he repeats such absurdities,
I'll arrest him, Chuma.
-Yes, but--
-And you as well,
do you understand?
The idea's absurd.
I'm supposed to accept
this was some sort of
acrobatic ritual
murder and suicide?
It's not only absurd,
it's an insult.
Those men were with me
for years. I trained them.
-Major, please, please try--
-I don't need opinions, Merrin.
I've been lenient
with you people, Chuma,
but warn the elders
that unless they hand over
the men that did this,
life in these parts will
become distinctly less pleasant.
[tense music]
I will get to
the bottom of this.
Major, please.
Do not choose the wrong side
in this, Merrin.
Remember what you owe...
to whom.
The wrong side, major?
This is not war.
-[insects chirping]
-[indistinct chattering]
[animal yowls]
Hello, Rachel.
-Is he all right?
-[Rachel] Take a look.
He started to run a fever
early this morning.
And there was a warmth
radiating from the cast.
I took it off,
expecting to find gangrene.
You can imagine my shock.
[Merrin] So it's better.
It's on its way to being healed.
This should have taken weeks
not days.
And the fever's dropping.
I only hope that...
Hope what?
There are cases of
false recovery of a...
body's system
appearing to improve
but it's actually evidence
of a deeper problem.
Any reason to believe
that's the case?
[gentle music]
No.
No, there isn't.
So--so many terrible things
have happened
in the last few days,
you just can't see
a good thing for what it is.
I'm just glad there is something
to be grateful for.
This village has been
on the verge of an explosion.
I don't know
who's more likely to ignite it,
Granville or the Turkana.
Mara quit.
Oh?
The elders told her
not to work here.
Because of the baby?
That's part of it.
[woman yelling in Turkana]
-[people yelling]
-[whistle blowing]
[dramatic music]
What's happening?
I suppose you've all
had a good laugh
thinking what fools you've
made of the British Empire.
But you've fooled no one.
I told you I'd get
to the bottom of this.
Major, please stop this.
You don't understand.
Sergeant major!
-Sir.
-I want these people
kept at a distance.
If they attempt to interfere,
they're to be arrested.
And if they resist, shoot them.
-Sir?
-Do it!
Yes, sir!
Not him.
I'll need an interpreter.
-And interpret carefully, Chuma.
-[ominous whirring]
Tell them I have waited
long enough to find out
who killed my men.
This is a small town.
One of them must know
who is responsible.
-[speaking Turkana]
-I'll give them one more chance
for that person to reveal
the murderer's name.
-Major!
-Mind your own, priest.
[speaking Turkana]
Sebituana says that
everybody knows that
your men killed each other.
They were stealing and
they went mad--
-Shut your mouth!
-[grunts]
You think you're the law here,
do you?
You go on hiding your murderers
because you don't fear me yet.
-Well, my friend,
let me assure you--
-Major, stop this!
...if a reason for fear
is what you need,
then I can oblige!
-[gunshot]
-[people shouting]
[dramatic music]
[Sergeant Major] Hold that man!
[ominous music]
Appa?
[tense music]
-Corporal Williams.
-[Williams] Sergeant major.
Have the men stand down
and fall in by the lorry.
Allow the natives
to tidy this up.
-[Williams] Move it!
-[Sergeant Major] Private Evans!
Sentry on the guard wall!
Places on the guard wall!
Stand guard
on the perimeter wall!
Sir. To the car, sir.
[soldier] Left, right, left.
Left, right, left, right, left,
right, left.
[demonic voice whispering]
[ominous music]
[Merrin]
I'm sorry I startled you.
Did you manage
to sleep through the night?
Yes.
I wish I could say the same
for Rachel.
She woke several times
after you left.
Seemed afraid something
might happen to the boy.
She finally calmed down
when I said
I'd watch over him, which...
which seemed
the least I could do.
-Don't.
-Don't what?
Don't acknowledge the fact
that I was the one that
asked Granville to come?
You didn't ask him
to shoot the girl.
There's only one person
responsible for what happened.
How is he?
[Francis] He seems fine.
Um, I'll take over.
You've got things to do.
[tense music]
Not much, I'm afraid.
I doubt there'll be
much of a class.
Well, the children seem to
genuinely like school and you.
I'm sure some of them
will turn up.
Are you all right, Merrin?
Is it cold in here?
[somber music]
Prayer, Merrin.
It's all we have
at times like these.
[Merrin] Yeah.
It's like having nothing,
isn't it?
Lankester.
May I speak to you
at a personal level?
Of course.
Christian to Christian?
"Evil may gain sway
over our lives for a time
but the ultimate
power of faith
lies in its ability to
strengthen men.
Not to conquer evil,
but to survive it."
You wrote that. I read it.
A young man's theories.
But you proved it.
I survived, if that's
what you mean.
But did I live?
Not really.
He didn't force you
to wander from him.
He allowed you to
out of love.
And if you find now
that you're lost,
you must have faith that
his love will guide you back.
All you have to do is ask.
You mean well,
but you can't see my soul.
[tense music]
I'm God's servant. He can.
[music continues]
[speaking Turkana]
Well...
I didn't think I would see
so many of you today.
When you go home, you must
remember to thank your families.
Their families not know, Father.
Their parents tell them
they must not come.
They say that Jesus Christ
killed Falashadey.
Falashadey, that was her name?
They come to school
because they think
if they do not come
maybe Jesus Christ
might kill them too.
Joseph, James, come here.
Jesus Christ did not kill
that young woman.
The British major did.
And it was very, very wrong.
[door bangs]
Jomo, no. You must not.
[blow thuds]
[dramatic music]
[people screaming]
[intense music]
[gunshot]
[tense music]
[speaking Turkana]
Anderson, get some medical help
in here.
[Emekwi] Joseph!
[James crying]
-My son.
-[James crying]
What did he say?
-What did he say?
-He said...
that he had to kill them
to stop the Christian evil
from spreading.
This, Father?
Is this how the Almighty
treats those who have
kept faith with him?
Yes.
[music continues]
[Francis] No.
[sobbing]
[insects chirping]
[tense music]
Father. Father Francis.
What is it? What's happened?
I think you'd better
see for yourself.
My...
My God.
-How did you...?
-I didn't.
Not intentionally.
This may be more your province
than mine, Father.
[Francis] It's a miracle.
I have to get Merrin.
Will you be all right?
Yes.
[door shuts]
Maybe you...
are the one proof of God
in this terrible place.
Because you're certainly
the only innocent creature.
[demonic voice whispering]
[demonic voice shouting]
[panting]
You know my guilt?
The spirit of our Savior.
It's in you.
And it will point the way
out of this darkness.
O Lord.
Lord, I pray thee,
hear my voice
as I have heard thine.
Let this blessed child
continue to be thy messenger...
that we may know thy will...
and thy wisdom.
In the name of the Father,
of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost.
God bless this child.
-[flesh sizzling]
-[roaring]
[dramatic music]
[demonic voice] Don't ever touch
me with that again, priest!
-[gasps]
-[intense music]
[insects chirping]
[tense music]
[gasping]
[flesh sizzling]
[engine rumbling]
The boy must be baptized.
You're still recovering from
that blow to the head, Father.
That's an awfully weak attempt
to explain this away.
Yes, it is.
Then you accept it?
An evil spirit at work in
this town? I didn't say that.
-[scoffs]
-Things you think you heard,
-the things you think you saw--
-You're saying
I'm hallucinating.
What about the burn
on his forehead?
Did I imagine that?
It's an injury
in the rough shape of a cross.
The rough shape.
-You've had a nervous
breakdown--
-Breakdown?!
Oh, I think it's you who have
been through too much, Merrin.
Will you please try
to control yourselves?
The boy needs rest.
And what about
his perfect English?
Oh, of course,
I must be imagining that too.
All right.
Let's assume
what you say is true.
What harm could there be
in his being baptized?
A great deal. Those people hate
and fear Cheche.
You want to expose him
to further danger
by having him join a religion
they equate with evil?
Oh, say it. Say it, Merrin.
Or can't you?
-The work of Satan.
-It's the work of man!
-Why can't you accept that?
-Because my only concern
is the eternal soul
of that young man.
Are you so arrogant, Merrin,
that you would involve
the rest of the world
in your crisis of faith?
That you would deny to someone
what you once cherished
simply because you now doubt it?
What makes you think he wants
it?
You could try asking him.
He's awake now.
[tense music]
Appa.
See.
Doctor, please,
would you ask him
if he would like to become
a Christian like
Appa and myself?
Unless you object.
Cheche.
[speaking Turkana]
-He would like it.
-Good.
-Good, Cheche. Good.
-He wants to do it
in the church.
He seems to think
that's where you live.
He wants to be as much
like you as he can.
Unless you want to explain
your misgivings to him.
There's a beautiful baptismal
font in the church.
We could use that.
-[people singing in distance]
-[playing drums]
Major Granville.
Major Granville, sir.
Sir, are you...
Are you all right, sir?
All right.
I shall be down in a moment.
Sir.
Oh, and sergeant major.
Sir?
I shall need you to give
Mr. Merrin a message.
Tell him...
Tell him I know now
how it's been for him
all these years.
But tell him there's no way out.
Other than...
-Sir!
-[gunshot]
[tense music]
I just need one or two more
things from the hotel, doctor.
-I'll have him ready, Father.
-Thank you.
[engine rumbling]
-[soldier] Up!
-[Sergeant Major] Leave it.
Don't bother, doctor.
He asked me
to give you a message
before he'd shot himself.
Said he understood
what you were going through
and that this was
the only way out.
Any idea what he meant?
No.
He never meant to
kill that girl.
That went against every part
of the major's nature.
-[ominous whirring]
-Something got into him.
Mr. Merrin, sir,
some of the boys, they, uh...
They're not too happy.
The major was well liked.
So if you have any pull
with the spearchuckers,
I'd advise them to step quietly.
[somber music]
I'll do what I can.
Thank you, sergeant major.
[Sergeant Major] Carry on!
[somber bugle playing]
-[playing drums]
-[people singing]
[speaking Turkana]
[tense music]
[sighs]
-[drums playing]
-[singing in distance]
[tense music]
[Francis praying in Latin]
-[singing continues in distance]
-[soldier] What do you make of
that, sergeant major?
I don't know.
But get on the radio to town.
I want all available men
up here on the double.
[Francis] Come on.
Okay. We're gonna go down.
Just like that.
That's perfect.
[tense music]
[soldier] Open the gate!
[drumming, singing continue
in distance]
-What is it?
-[Chuma] It's music for battle.
[drumming, singing continue]
[drumming, singing end]
Father.
[flesh squelching]
[ominous music]
[growling]
Cheche.
-His fever's come back.
-Quickly, doctor.
-But--
-Please, this is no miracle.
Help me.
Hold the child's head
over the font.
[tense music]
Cheche Michael...
[speaking Latin]
[speaking Latin] Cheche Michael.
-[roaring]
-[Francis groans]
-[Rachel gasps]
-[dramatic music]
-[thudding]
-[groaning]
-[groans]
[demonic voice]
I warned you about that, priest!
[Sebituana speaking Turkana]
It is Sebituana.
He wants to talk to
the British commander.
Some sort of trick, then?
-I'll go.
-No.
We'll go.
Corporal Williams,
Private Standish, join us.
-Arms at the ready.
-[gun cocks]
[speaking Turkana]
Sebituana does not
wish to fight.
Well, they ain't dressed
for ballroom dancing, Chuma.
What does he want, then?
[both speaking Turkana]
For the church to be
buried again. That, and...
[speaking Turkana]
He wants Father Francis.
He says only he brought
the Christian evil
and the soldiers.
[speaking Turkana]
He must die. So must the boy.
Only Cheche has drawn strength
from all the evil
that has happened.
[Sebituana speaking Turkana]
The British, if they leave now,
-will be spared.
-Right.
You can tell Sebituana
and his friends to disperse
quietly and go home
and we'll be the ones
doing the sparing.
[both speaking Turkana]
If it's a fight they want,
it's a fight
they're gonna get.
[tense music]
[choking]
You had no idea
what you were toying with,
did you?
[groaning, roaring]
-The book of rituals.
-[Cheche groaning]
I have a copy.
I've got to get to town.
[panting]
This boy is possessed.
[demon growling]
[roaring]
[dramatic music]
[demon growling]
-Where's Rachel and Cheche?
-Still inside.
The boy is...
I must get the book of rituals.
Satan is real.
[Cheche panting]
[dramatic music]
[bones cracking]
[energy whooshing]
[Satanic voice]
I am perfection.
[growling]
[rumbling]
[soldiers shouting]
-Francis!
-No.
[ominous music]
It's too dangerous.
I'm gonna maintain
the perimeter until daybreak.
We'll look for the Father then.
We have to clear those doors.
We have to get them out.
I've got my men to think of
right now.
They're trapped in there!
We'll wait till the sun
to come up. Then we'll start
moving the rubble.
All right, sir?
[tense music]
-Well, are they gone or not?
-There is no way to know.
Right, then. Corporal Williams,
send a detail of men to help
Mr. Merrin clear that rubble.
Then I want you
and another detail
to go out there and see
if our friends are gone or not.
And have a look for
Father Francis.
The rest of the squad's
to stay on the perimeter.
[panting]
[whispering]
[indistinct chattering]
[tense music]
How could you leave him
like that?
We didn't know what to do, sir.
[Sergeant Major]
Private Standish, cut him down.
-[whispers] Father Merrin.
-He's alive.
-Get a stretcher.
-Do it!
Chuma, get the nurse,
tell her to come to the clinic.
Tell her she must come,
tell her it's Father Francis.
It's him. It's him.
[tense music]
It's him.
You'll be fine. Give me a hand!
[growling]
It's him.
[tense music]
Thank you for coming, Mara.
I did it for Father Francis.
Where is Miss Rachel?
At the dig.
[Francis wheezes]
-Yes?
-Unction, Father.
I need the last rites.
No.
-You'll be all right.
-My immortal--
My immortal soul
is in danger. Please.
Please, Merrin.
Please get the kit.
Please.
[somber music]
You'll need the book of
Roman rituals.
It's in my room.
-I haven't forgotten
the last rites.
-Not for that.
You'll need it
for the rite of exorcism.
You can't make that decision.
The archbishop
needs to be contacted.
There's no time.
He's in the boy.
Oh, God help us.
-Any progress?
-No.
-How's Father Francis?
-He's resting.
Savages.
If they think they can get
away with this, they don't
understand the British.
-[rumbling]
-Look out!
Chuma, are you all right?
Don't go in!
Look after Chuma.
Don't follow me.
[ominous music]
Rachel?
[indistinct whispering]
[shaky breathing]
Is that you, Rachel?
[music continues]
[whimpering]
-[match striking]
-[dramatic music]
[whispering] Rachel.
Rachel.
Rachel, wake up.
Wake up, you're dreaming.
Rachel.
Wake up.
-Where's Cheche?
-No.
I was there.
It was so real.
-Chelmno.
-No, you were dreaming.
-You were dreaming.
You are here.
-I wanted to be--
I want to be back.
He took me there.
-You were dreaming, that's all.
-But I want to go back.
You have to let me.
It was different, I was helping.
-You can go!
-Rachel!
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry, Rachel.
-I'm sorry.
-We can help each other.
Only we can help each other.
Rachel.
We're the same, you and I.
[gentle music]
[tense music]
[Satanic voice]
You're a passionate man, Merrin.
Full of hunger.
[music continues]
Get out.
Now.
[breathing heavily]
You call me cruel.
Rachel was rewriting her past.
Then you destroyed it.
You're the great deceiver.
[dramatic music]
Did Father Francis mention me?
He called you Satan.
Did I not roll away
the stones for you?
Why torment Rachel?
She's not the one who sinned.
[breathes heavily]
She never helped
another prisoner.
She traded her body for food.
[tense music]
She betrayed her friends.
-Liar!
-You hate God, Merrin.
And why not?
God gives you guilt.
The guilt is unbearable.
[whispering] I do not curse God.
[Cheche in Satanic voice] But...
there is one thing you can do.
You can cease to care.
That is your offer?
I offer freedom.
[ominous music]
Run.
Run, Merrin, run.
[Merrin] You tried me, Lord.
I failed.
Forgive my disbelief.
Help my disbelief.
Take my disbelief into
your bosom
and give me strength.
Absolve my sins and purify me.
Purify me for this task.
[somber music]
Everything was good in Derati
until the missionary came.
Jomo may have held the spear,
but Father Francis
killed my son.
-[playing drums]
-[people singing, shouting]
[speaking Turkana]
[Sergeant Major] Easy, boys.
Let Mr. Merrin through.
[tense music]
Or is it Father Merrin?
Christ, have mercy on us.
Lord, have mercy on us.
Better not come out, priest,
if you know what's good for you.
[Merrin]
Christ, have mercy on us.
[Sergeant Major]
Blood will flow tonight.
[Merrin] Lord, have mercy on us.
[growling]
[demonic voice whispering]
[music continues]
[whispering indistinctly]
Matthew, pray for us.
[ominous music]
[ominous whirring]
[Cheche in Satanic voice]
You think your uniform
will save you?
[music continues]
Lord, have mercy on us.
Christ, hear us.
God, the Father of heaven,
have mercy on us.
-God, the Son...
-It's not working.
[Merrin] Redeemer of the world,
have mercy on us.
Oh, God, the Holy Ghost,
Holy Trinity, one God,
have mercy on us.
You're a weak vessel.
[flesh sizzles]
-[flesh sizzles]
-[groans]
[roars]
[thuds]
A weak vessel leaks.
It is not only me
who fights you.
I'm not alone.
All ye holy angels
and archangels,
pray for us.
All ye holy orders of
blessed spirits,
pray for us.
St. John the Baptist,
St. Paul, pray for us.
St. James, pray for us.
[muffled yelling]
[Merrin]
St. John, pray for us.
[dramatic music]
St. Thomas, pray for us.
St. Matthew, pray for us.
All ye holy martyrs,
pray for us.
St. Gregory, pray for us.
St. Ambrose, pray for us.
St. Augustine, pray for us.
All ye men and women,
saints of God
make intercession for us.
From thy wrath, O Lord,
deliver us.
From anger, hatred
and ill will, O Lord,
deliver us.
-From lightning and tempest--
-Don't you want to go back?
[ominous music]
Yes.
Go back.
From pestilence,
famine and war,
O Lord, deliver us.
Go back.
You can undo
the events of that day.
You can end your guilt.
[growling]
Go back.
[Merrin] From everlasting death
-through his ho--
-Don't you want to go back?
Through his...
Through--through his--
through his ho...
[wind whistling]
[bell ringing]
[tense music]
You, priest.
What's your name?
I'm Father Merrin.
And these people confess to you?
So point out the one
who's responsible.
No one here did this,
lieutenant.
They aren't capable of it.
-Did you hear what I said?
-That God is not here today?
Yes, I know that.
I'm going to shoot 10 of you
in the hope that we can
demonstrate to this wretch
the terrible responsibility
he has incurred.
[Merrin] Stop.
[music continues]
You have some objection, Father?
Shoot me.
Yes, you'd like that.
You choose.
You have five seconds.
-I can't.
-You can't what?
Pick who will be sacrificed?
History is full of priests
who did little else.
Father Merrin. You begin
to irritate me, Father.
Tell your men to lay down
their weapons and leave.
Priest or no,
I swear I will kill you.
You'll get what satisfaction
you want, priest,
because my men will not
lay down their weapons.
[gunshot]
[ominous music]
[horse whinnies]
[gunshot]
-[horse whinnies]
-[wind whooshing]
[gunshot]
[somber music]
[gun clicking]
[muffled gunshots]
[muffled screaming]
[metal slicing]
Feel better?
You did what you could.
You laid down your life,
but God decided to
kill them anyway.
Your guilt is gone.
You are free.
Free?
To cease to care?
To walk this earth
your own man
without debt or guilt.
This earth is not your dominion.
Man is the chosen temple of God.
His holy vessel.
-Through the mastery...
-[growls]
...of the holy incarnation...
-[growling]
-O Lord, deliver us.
-Through thy coming--
-[snarls]
[Cheche in Satanic voice]
I will destroy you!
[dramatic music]
[Merrin] Through thy nativity,
O Lord, deliver us.
Through thy baptism and
thy holy fasting, deliver us.
[soldiers screaming]
[Merrin]
Through thy temptation,
40 days and 40 nights
in the desert,
O Lord, deliver us.
Through thy sacrifice
on the cross,
[shouts indistinctly]
[Merrin] O Lord, deliver us.
Through thy holy resurrection,
deliver.
Through the coming
of the Holy Ghost, deliver.
Be uprooted and expelled
from this creature of God.
[growling]
Hear therefore...
and fear...
Satan!
[hissing]
[roaring]
In the name of
Archangel Michael,
whose church this is,
in the name of all those
who have died for
our Savior,
in the name of Christ
and all his saints,
I cast thee out.
The faith of the saints
casts you out.
The blood of the martyrs
The heavenly host of all those
saved and in grace
casts you out.
[in normal voice] Appa.
Please.
Oh. Oh, Cheche.
Have faith, Cheche.
[hissing]
[Satanic voice]
I will kill you both!
-[grunts]
-[shrieking]
With my last effort,
I will oppose you.
-[grunts]
-[whimpering]
From one end of the world
to the other,
I will oppose you.
Until my soul burns in hell,
I will oppose you!
[in normal voice] Appa.
Stop.
Hurts.
We exorcise you,
each unclean spirit.
We cast you out,
each power of Satan,
each infestation
of the enemy.
Repel, O Lord,
the power of this evil prince!
[dramatic music]
[ominous whirring]
-[panting]
-[somber music]
In the name of the Father,
the Son,
and the Holy Ghost,
I absolve thee.
[hinges creaking]
[indistinct chattering]
[Chuma speaking Turkana]
[speaking Turkana]
He wants to know if
you're certain that the demon
in the church is gone.
Yes, from here.
[both speaking Turkana]
He wishes you strength.
He says the demon
is your enemy now
and he will pursue you.
[somber music]
[Sergeant Major] We'll be ready
to pull out within the hour.
Oh, and Father Merrin...
anyone asks me
about this place, sir,
I didn't see a thing.
They won't get
anything out of me.
Good luck.
[Rachel speaking Turkana]
I've got myself a new helper.
Appa.
Good day.
-You're leaving too?
-Well, not just yet, but soon.
-Where?
-To Rome.
They want a report.
Yes, the Church
is a leaky structure,
but it's all I have.
I think the Holy See
will find some use for me.
[gentle music]
Will you write me?
Here?
-They need me here.
-Yes.
Write me.
[chuckles]
[music continues]
[grand music]
[dark music]
[dramatic music]
[tense music]
[Satanic voice]
I am perfection.